====================
History of packaging
====================

(from Martijn Faassen, originaly at :
http://faassen.n--tree.net/blog/view/weblog/2009/11/09/0)

This was added to the guide so readers can get a historical background.

Introduction
============


Earlier this year I was at PyCon in the US. I had an interesting experience
there: people were talking about the problem of packaging and distributing
Python libraries. People had the impression that this was an urgent problem
that hadn't been solved yet. I detected a vibe asking for the Python core
developers to please come and solve our packaging problems for us.

I felt like I had stepped into a parallel universe. I've been using powerful
tools to assemble applications from Python packages automatically for years
now. Last summer at EuroPython, when this discussion came up again, I
maintained that packaging and distributing Python libraries is a solved
problem. I put the point strongly, to make people think. I fully agree that the
current solutions are imperfect and that they can be improved in many ways. But
I also maintain that the current solutions are indeed solutions.

There is now a lot of packaging infrastructure in the Python community, a lot
of technology, and a lot of experience. I think that for a lot of Python
developers the historical background behind all this is missing. I will try to
provide one here. It's important to realize that progress has been made, step
by step, for more than a decade now, and we have a fine infrastructure today.

I've named some important contributors to the Python packaging story, but
undoubtedly I've also did not mention a lot of other important names. My
apologies in advance to those I missed.

The dawn of Python packaging
============================

The Python world has been talking about solutions for packaging and
distributing Python libraries for a very long time. I remember when I was new
in the Python world about a decade ago in the late 90s, it was considered
important and urgent that the Python community implement something like Perl's
CPAN. I'm sure too that this debate had started long before I started paying
attention.

I've never used CPAN, but over the years I've seen it held up by many as
something that seriously contributes to the power of the Perl language. With
CPAN, I understand, you can search and browse Perl packages and you can install
them from the net.

So, lots of people were talking about a Python equivalent to CPAN with some
urgency. At the same time, the Python world didn't seem to move very quickly on
this front...

Distutils
=========

The Distutils SIG (special interest group) was started in late 1998. Greg Ward
in the context of this discussion group started to create Distutils about this
time. Distutils allows you to structure your Python project so that it has a
setup.py. Through this setup.py you can issue a variety of commands, such as
creating a tarball out of your project, or installing your project. Distutils
importantly also has infrastructure to help compiling C extensions for your
Python package. Distutils was added to the Python standard library in Python
1.6, released in 2000.

Metadata
========

We now had a way to distribute and install Python packages, if we did the
distribution ourselves. We didn't have a centralized index (or catalog) of
packages yet, however. To work on this, the Catalog SIG was started in the year
2000.

The first step was to standardize the metadata that could be cataloged by any
index of Python packages. Andrew Kuchling drove the effort on this, culminating
in PEP 241 in 2001, later updated by PEP 314:

Distutils was modified so it could work with this standardized metadata.

PyPI
====

In late 2002, Richard Jones started work on the Python Package Index, PyPI.
PyPI is also known as the Cheeseshop, a name I prefer but apparently has been
deprecated. The first work on an implementation started, and PEP 301 that
describes PyPI was also created then. Distutils was extended so the metadata
and packages themselves could be uploaded to this package index. By 2003, the
Python package index was up and running.

The Python world now had a way to upload packages and metadata to a central
index. If we then manually downloaded a package we could install it using
setup.py thanks to Distutils.

Setuptools
==========

Phillip Eby started work on Setuptools in 2004. Setuptools is a whole range of
extensions to Distutils such as from a binary installation format (eggs), an
automatic package installation tool, and the definition and declaration of
scripts for installation. Work continued throughout 2005 and 2006, and feature
after feature was added to support a whole range of advanced usage scenarios.

By 2005, you could install packages automatically into your Python interpreter
using easy_install. Dependencies would be automatically pulled in. If packages
contained C code it would pull in the binary egg, or if not available, it would
compile one automatically.

The sheer amount of features that Setuptools brings to the table must be
stressed: namespace packages, optional dependencies, automatic manifest
building by inspecting version control systems, web scraping to find packages
in unusual places, recognition of complex version numbering schemes, and so on,
and so on. Some of these features perhaps seem esoteric to many, but complex
projects use many of them.

The problems of shared packages
===============================

The problem remained that all these packages were installed into your Python
interpreter. This is icky. People's site-packages directories became a mess of
packages. You also need root access to easy_install a package into your system
Python. Sharing all packages in a direcory in general, even locally, is not
always a good idea: one version of a library needed by one application might
break another one.

Solutions for this emerged in 2006.

Virtualenv
==========

Ian Bicking drove one line of solutions: virtual-python, which evolved into
workingenv, which evolved into virtualenv in 2007. The concept behind this
approach is to allow the developer to create as many fully working Python
environments as they like from a central system installation of Python. When
the developer activates the virtualenv, easy_install will install all packages
into its the virtualenv's site-packages. This allows you to create a virtualenv
per project and thus isolate each project from each other.

Buildout
========

In 2006 as well, Jim Fulton created Buildout, building on Setuptools and
easy_install. Buildout can create an isolated project environment like
virtualenv does, but is more ambitious: the goal is to create a system for
repeatable installations of potentially very complex projects. Instead of
writing an INSTALL.txt that tells others who to install the prerequites for a
package (Python or not), with Buildout these prerequisites can be installed
automatically.

The brilliance of Buildout is that it is easily extensible with new
installation recipes. These recipes themselves are also installed automatically
from PyPI. This has spawned a whole ecosystem of Buildout recipes that can do a
whole range of things, from generating documentation to installing MySQL.

Since Buildout came out of the Zope world, Buildout for a long time was seen as
something only Zope developers would use, but the technology is not
Zope-specific at all, and more and more developers are picking up on it.

In 2008, Ian Bicking created an alternative for easy_install called pip, also
building on Setuptools. Less ambitious than buildout, it aimed to fix some of
the shortcomings of easy_install. I haven't used it myself yet, so I will leave
it to others to go into details.

Setuptools and the standard library
===================================

The many improvements that Setuptools brought to the Python packaging story
hadn't made it into the Python Standard Library, where Distutils was
stagnating. Attempts had been made to bring Setuptools into the standard
library at some point during its development, but for one reason or another
these efforts had foundered.

Setuptools probably got where it is so quickly because it worked around often
very slow process of adopting something into the standard library, but that
approach also helped confuse the situation for Python developers.

Last year Tarek Ziade started looking into the topic of bringing improvements
into Distutils. There was a discussion just before PyCon 2009 about this topic
between various Python developers as well, which probably explains why the
topic was in the air. I understood that some decisions were made:

- let the people with extensive packaging experience (such as Tarek) drive
  this process.
- free the metadata from Distutils and Setuptools so that other packaging
  tools can make use of it more easily.

Distribute
==========

By 2008, Setuptools had become a vital part of the Python development
infrastructure. Unfortunately the Setuptools development process has some
flaws. It is very centered around Phillip Eby. While he had been extremely
active before, by that time he was spending a lot less energy on it. Because of
the importance of the technology to the wider community, various developers had
started contributing improvements and fixes, but these were piling up.

This year, after some period of trying to open up the Setuptools project
itself, some of these developers led by Tarek Ziade decided to fork Setuptools.
The fork is named Distribute. The aim is to develop the technology with a
larger community of developers. One of the first big improvements of the
Distribute project is Python 3 support.

Quite understandably this fork led to some friction between Tarek, Phillip and
others. I trust that this friction will resolve itself and that the developers
involved will continue to work with each other, as all have something valuable
contribute.

Operating system packaging
==========================

One point that always comes up in discussions about Python packaging tools is
operating system packaging. In particular Linux distributions have developed
extremely powerful ways to distribute and install complex libraries and
application, manage versions and dependencies and so on.

Naturally when the topic of Python packaging comes up, people think about
operating system packaging solutions like this. Let me start off that I fully
agree that Python packaging solutions can learn a lot from operating system
packaging solutions.

Why don't we just use a solution like that directly, though? Why is a Python
specific packaging solution necessary at all?

There are a number of answers to this. One is that operating packaging
solutions aren't universal: if we decided to use Debian's system, what would we
do on Windows?

The most important answer however is that there are two related but also very
different use cases for packaging:

- system administration: deploying and administrating existing software.
- development: combining software to develop new software.

The Python packaging systems described above primarily try to solve the
development use case: I'm a Python developer, and I'm developing multiple
projects at the same time, perhaps in multiple versions, that have different
dependencies. I need to reuse packages created by other developers, so I need
an easy way to depend on such packages. These packages are sometimes in a
rather early state of development, or perhaps I'm even creating a new one. If I
want to improve such a package I depend on, I need an easy way to start hacking
on it.

Operating system packaging solutions as I've seen them used are ill suited for
the development use case. They are aimed at creating a single consistent
installation that is easy to upgrade with an eye on security. Backwards
compatibility is important. Packages tend to be relatively mature.

For all I know it might indeed be possible to use an operating system packaging
tool as a good development packaging tool. But I've heard very little about
such practices. Please enlighten me if you have.

It's also important to note that the Python world isn't as good as it should be
at supporting operating system packaging solutions. The freeing up of package
metadata from the confines of the setup.py file into a more independently
reusable format as was decided at PyCon should help here. i

Conclusions
===========

We are now in a time of consolidation and opening up. Many of the solutions
pioneered by Setuptools are going to be polished to go into the Python Standard
Library. At the same time, the community surrounding these technologies is
opening up. By making metadata used by Distutils and Setuptools more easily
available to other systems, new tools can also more easily be created.

The Python packaging story had many contributors over the years. We now have a
powerful infrastructure. Do we have an equivalent to CPAN? I don't know enough
about CPAN to be sure. But what we have is certainly useful and valuable. In my
parallel universe, I use advanced Python packaging tools every day, and I
recommend all Python programmers to look into this technology if they haven't
already. Join me in my parallel universe!

Update: I just found out there was a huge thread on python-dev about this in
the last few days which focused around the question whether we have the
equivalent of CPAN now. One of them funny coincidences...
http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.python.distutils.devel/11359

